
# Sparkify Data Setup


## Introduction

<p>This project is about analyzing the data on songs and user activity on the new music streaming app from Sparkify. The analytics team at Sparkify, is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app. The data engineers are tasked with the creation of a postgres database with tables specifically designed to optimize queries on song play analysis. We will be creating a database schema, defining fact and dimension tables for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and write an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into the tables in postgres, using Python and SQL.<br>This database would allow the business users to aggregate all the songs, artists, users and songplays at one place. Further down the line, Sparkify would be able to analyze the general popularity of songs or artists, popularity of songs and artists at specific geographic locations etc.</p>

    
## Datasets

<p><code>Songs Dataset</code>: The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID.<br><br><code>Log Dataset</code>: The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations. The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month.</p>


## Schema

<p>Using the song and log datasets, we will be using a star schema, optimized for queries on song play analysis. We will create one fact table named <code>songplays</code> and four dimension tables namely, <code>users, songs, artists,</code> and <code>time</code>.

<ol>
    <li><code>Songplays</code>: Records in the log data associated with song plays.</li>
    <li><code>Users</code>: Users in the app.</li>
    <li><code>Songs</code>: Songs in the music database.</li>
    <li><code>Artists</code>: Artists in the music database.</li>
    <li><code>Time</code>: Timestamps of records in <code>songplays</code> table broken down into specific units.</li>
</ol>
</p>


## Execution

 - Note that you need to have a local version of PostgreSQL installed to create the required tables and execute this data pipeline, preferably V 13.4 and above.
 - Install the required python libraries using the command <code>pip install -r pre_requisite_libraries.txt</code>.
 - Execute the script <code>create_tables.py</code> first, which uses the file <code>sql_queries.py</code> as input. This drops and creates the tables required, in case there is a need to reset them each time, before each the ETL scripts are run.
 - Next, execute the script <code>etl.py</code> which reads and processes the data files and loads them into the tables.